Add a page about DVT (Distributed Validator Technology) [Fixes #9536] (#9608)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/dvt/index.md

---
title: Distributed Validator Technology
description: Distributed Validator Technology enables the distributed operation of an Ethereum validator by multiple parties.
lang: en
---

> # Distributed Validator Technology {#what-is-dvt}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
we typically do not include this H1 header in addition to the title defined in the frontmatter. It also had the same page ID as the following section.

> _With the advent of Ethreum’s PoS consensus, standard validator setups were accompanied by some challenges and the risk of stake centralization. To help distribute validator nodes and decentralize the network, Distributed Validator Technology was conceived._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This relies on a lot of prior knowledge - lets just jump in to the start of the next section and ease the reader in more gently.

> <Divider />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## What is DVT? {#what-is-dvt}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> **Distributed Validator Technology (DVT)** is a technology primitive in the evolving **Ethereum technology** stack aimed at improving the resilience and health of the Ethereum blockchain. The solution focuses on strengthening the backbone of the blockchain's PoS consensus by enabling multiple non-trusting parties to operate an Ethereum validator collectively, as opposed to how standard validators are operated. This shift in validator operation dramatically improves the liveness and security of the network while significantly reducing slashing, downtime, and centralization risks compared to standard validator setups. 

Reviewer: i don't think dvt should be referred to as a "primitive". 
```suggestion
**Distributed Validator Technology (DVT)** splits the private key used to secure a validator across many computers organized into a "cluster". The benefit of this is that it makes it very difficult for attackers to gain access to the key, because it is not stored in full on any single machine. It also allows for some nodes to go offline, as the necessary signing can be done by a subset of the machines in each cluster. This reduces single points of failure from the network and makes the whole validator set more robust. 
```

> A way to think about DVT is that DVT is to validators as multisig is to wallets. Where standard validators use a single key to sign duties, the key of a Distributed Validator is split across multiple nodes. In the case of DVT, the "multisig" is operated by a consensus protocol (BFT) instead of human interaction. Enabling the distributed operation of an Ethereum validator with best-in-class security practices. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Our typical reader will have to look up several of these terms - i think it is best to skip straight to the next paragraph

Reviewer 2: I think it's good to have a practical example. Perhaps we can simplify and move to another section? e.g., How does DVT work?

> Distributing a new or existing validator is quite complex in practice, but using a DVT solution like ssv.network as a layer to split the validator private key into multiple key shares makes the technology more accessible. Regardless of the [DVT-implementation](<https://ssv.network/>) stakers can have multiple nodes each operating a key share in a cluster, allowing them to ensure the uptime of their validators.

Reviewer: typically we would try not to promote one project when several are available. I think the page would flow better by skipping straight to the next section.
```suggestion
```

## How does DVT work? {#how-does-dvt-work}

> DVT uses multiple components to facilitate the distribution of an Ethereum validator:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A DVT solution contains the following components :
```

![A Diagram showing how a single validator key is split into key shares and distributed to multiple nodes with varying components.](./dvt-cluster.png)

> - **[Shamir's Secret Sharing](https://medium.com/@keylesstech/a-beginners-guide-to-shamir-s-secret-sharing-e864efbf3648)** - Validator keys use BLS signatures - that are additive - allowing multiple signatures to be combined to recreate a validator key signature. The BLS private validator key is split into multiple "key shares." Using [BLS aggregation](https://our.status.im/fastest-bls-signature-implementation/), multiple shares or signatures can be aggregated into a single signature. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[Shamir's Secret Sharing](https://medium.com/@keylesstech/a-beginners-guide-to-shamir-s-secret-sharing-e864efbf3648)** - Validators use BLS keys. Individual BLS keys can be combined into a single aggregate very efficiently. In DVT, the private key for a validator is the [aggregate](https://our.status.im/fastest-bls-signature-implementation/) of the BLS signatures of each operator in the cluster. 
```

Author: **[Shamir's Secret Sharing](https://medium.com/@keylesstech/a-beginners-guide-to-shamir-s-secret-sharing-e864efbf3648)** - Validators use [BLS keys](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BLS_digital_signature). Individual BLS keys ("key shares") can be combined into a single aggregated key (signature). In DVT, the private key for a validator are the the [combined BLS signatures](https://our.status.im/fastest-bls-signature-implementation/) of each operator in the cluster.

Reviewer: ok - using your text here, but with a typo correction
```suggestion
- **[Shamir's Secret Sharing](https://medium.com/@keylesstech/a-beginners-guide-to-shamir-s-secret-sharing-e864efbf3648)** - Validators use [BLS keys](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BLS_digital_signature). Individual BLS keys ("key shares") can be combined into a single aggregated key (signature). In DVT, the private key for a validator is the combined BLS signature of each operator in the cluster.
```

> - **[Threshold Signature Scheme](https://medium.com/nethermind-eth/threshold-signature-schemes-36f40bc42aca)** - Determines the threshold of key shares that are required to create a distributed validator key signature for signing duties, i.e., 3 key shares out of 4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[Threshold Signature Scheme](https://medium.com/nethermind-eth/threshold-signature-schemes-36f40bc42aca)** - Determines the number of individual key shares that are required for signing duties, e.g., 3 out of 4.
```

- **[Distributed Key Generation (DKG)](https://medium.com/toruslabs/what-distributed-key-generation-is-866adc79620)** - Cryptographic process that generates the key shares and is used to distribute the shares of an existing or new validator key to the nodes in a cluster.

> - **[Multi-Party Computation (MPC)](https://messari.io/report/applying-multiparty-computation-to-the-world-of-blockchains)** - The key shares of a distributed validator are transferred to nodes that securely perform the decentralized computation of validator duties without reconstructing the validator key on a single device. The private validator key is never reconstructed, but rather signatures from a threshold of the key shares are aggregated to produce the distributed validator key signature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[Multi-Party Computation (MPC)](https://messari.io/report/applying-multiparty-computation-to-the-world-of-blockchains)** - The full validator key is generated in secret using multiparty computation. The full key is never known to any individual operator - they only ever know their own part of it (their "share").
```

> - **[(I)BFT Consensus Protocol](https://www.naukri.com/learning/articles/byzantine-fault-tolerance-in-blockchain/)** - It is responsible for the coordination process of the machines performing validator duties in a distributed validator "cluster." Implementations may vary but at its core the protocol selects a node responsible for block proposal and shares the information with the other participants. Once the predefined threshold of key shares deems the block valid, it is added to the chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Consensus Protocol** - The consensus protocol selects one node to be the block proposer. They share the block with the other nodes in the cluster, who add their key shares to the aggregate signature. When enough key shares have been aggregated, the block is proposed on Ethereum.
```

> Altogether, the key share signatures are combined to create a validator key signature to perform duties on the Beacon Chain. A distributed validator (DV) cluster operates with each node holding a key share of the complete validator key. No single node can recreate the validator's private key or produce a signature for the validator on its own, nor do they have access to the key shares of others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

repetition of earlier content

> In a validator cluster of four nodes, following the threshold n≥3f+1, where n is the number of nodes and f is the number of faulty nodes the system can tolerate. Only three of the key shares are required to produce a valid signature. The cluster can tolerate one faulty or malicious operator and continue functioning as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
this point has already been made earlier

Nodes within DV clusters do not need to trust each other to operate as a group. As long as a predefined majority threshold of key shares is signed appropriately, the validator will perform its duties as intended. Distributed validators have built-in fault tolerance and can achieve genuine [active-active redundancy](https://kemptechnologies.com/white-papers/unfog-confusion-active-passive-activeactive-load-balancing) by maintaining diverse operator configurations. 

> <Divider />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Why do we need DVT? {#why-do-we-need-dvt}

The standard validator configuration creates single points of failure in Ethereum's consensus layer that lead to several challenges and risks:

### Security {#security}

Validators generate two public-private key pairs: validator keys for participating in consensus and withdrawal keys for accessing funds. While validators can secure withdrawal keys in cold storage, validator private keys must be online 24/7, increasing the possibility of theft. If a validator private key is compromised, an attacker can control the validator, potentially leading to slashing or the loss of the staker's ETH. 

> With DVT, the validator's private key is split into key shares, and since the nodes only need to have their key share online, the validator's private key can be safely stored in cold storage.

Reviewer: if no individual knows the full key, how can it be kept in cold storage?

Reviewer 2: In the case of existing validator keys that have not been generated through DKG, the key can be encrypted and distributed and the original kept in cold storage.

Reviewer: Does this hit the intended points?

```suggestion
Validators that have previously generated a private key without using distributed key generation can still participate in DVT.  In this case, the existing key is split into key shares and one share is provided to each of multiple nodes. The full key can be kept safely secured in cold storage.
```

Reviewer 2: The big thing here is that the validator key, whether it's generated via Launchpad or DKG. It's only the encrypted keyshares of the validator key that stay online. In both cases, the validator key can be stored securely offline because it's only the key shares that are used for distributed validation by the nodes. DKG implementations may vary but most of the time the staker (who is creating a validator key) still knows the full key. But can now store it offline. 
**I would suggest:**

By using DVT, stakers can participate in staking while keeping the validator private key in cold storage. This is achieved by encrypting the original validator key and then splitting it into key shares. The key shares live online and are distributed to multiple nodes which enable the distributed operation of the validator. Allowing the staker to keep the original validator key securely offline.

Reviewer: ok, will use your text here

### No Single Points of Failure {#no-single-point-of-failure}

> Standard validators have various fallible components, consisting of hardware (node hosting and physical location) and software (node software and operating system), each presenting a single point of failure. Active-passive solutions have been implemented but are costly and can lead to slashing through double attestations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a validator is divided across multiple operators and multiple machines, it can withstand individual hardware and software failures without going offline. The risk of failures can also be reduced by using diverse hardware and software configurations across the nodes in a cluster. This resilience is not available to today's validators - it comes from the DVT layer.
```

> Since DVT distributes the operation of a validator between multiple parties, each partie's machine can run different infrastructure component configurations (e.g., multiple client types and nodes hosted in various locations).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> If one of the components of a machine in a cluster goes down (For example, if there are four operators in a validator cluster and one uses a specific client that has a bug), the others ensure that the validator keeps running. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Centralization {#centralization}

> Economies of scale in staking can lead to the centralization of stake, which is the idea that there is a single point of failure in the form of a single entity - a service provider or client - that has enough market share to potentially take down or censor the network (with malicious intent or through human error). 

Reviewer: The ideal scenario for Ethereum is to have as many independently operated validators as possible. However, a few staking providers have become very popular and account for a substantial portion of the total staked ETH on the network. DVT can allow these operators to exist while preserving decentralization of stake. This is because the keys for each validator are distributed across many machines and it would take much greater collusion for a validator to turn malicious.

> Economies of scale in staking can lead to the centralization of stake, which is the idea that there is a single point of failure in the form of a single entity - a service provider or client - that has enough market share to potentially take down or censor the network (with malicious intent or through human error). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ideal scenario for Ethereum is to have as many independently operated validators as possible. However, a few staking providers have become very popular and account for a substantial portion of the total staked ETH on the network. DVT can allow these operators to exist while preserving decentralization of stake. This is because the keys for each validator are distributed across many machines and it would take much greater collusion for a validator to turn malicious.
```

> Stake centralization can also lead to client centralization since it's easier for services to support only one or two client configurations. In case of a faulty node, or poor performance, this could have a massive impact on the entire network, which should be avoided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Without DVT, it's easier for staking providers to support only one or two client configurations for all their validators, increasing the impact of a client bug. DVT can be used to spread the risk across multiple client configurations and different hardware, creating resilience through diversity.
```

> DVT solves these issues by allowing staking providers to distribute their validator's operation between multiple operators, leading to improved operator participation in the network. While simultaneously reducing correlation risks by diversifying client configurations and jurisdictions. Resulting in the Ethereum network being more resistant and decentralized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
mostly repetition of previous points

> In a nutshell, DVT enables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overall, DVT offers the following benefits to Ethereum:
```

- Decentralization of Ethereum's PoS consensus
- Ensures the liveness of the network
- Creates validator fault tolerance
- Trust minimized validator operation
- Minimized slashing and downtime risks
- Improves Diversity (client, data center, location, regulation, etc.)
- Enhanced security of validator key management

## DVT use cases {#dvt-use-cases}

DVT has significant implications for the broader staking industry:

### Solo stakers {#solo-stakers}

> The main benefit DVT brings to solo stakers is that it removes the technical barrier for running a validator node. Stakers that want to run their own validators no longer have to supply the infrastructure to participate in staking. Running a single validator instance is susceptible to technical issues, hacking, and high maintenance costs. A solo staker can use DVT to run their validator in a decentralized manner, on par with the performance of large staking services, while still having complete control over their validator keys and custody of their funds.

Reviewer: is this true?

DVT is middleware that sits between an execution client and a consensus client. If anything adding DVT would add some friction for a home validator because they have to manage key share generation and distribution, no?

There may be SaaS providers offering DVT-enabled nodes that make it all easy to run, but this isn't a feature of DVT, these services already exist for non-DVT nodes.

Apologies if I've misunderstood something.

Reviewer 3: Curious the same. Also might be missing something, but this doesn't seem to align with what has been stated so far.

Reviewer 2: So the main points I want to get across here are that non-custodial staking is only really possible with DVT and that, as a solo staker, you don't need to have the hardware to run your validator(s) and attest to duties etc. 

Using DVT, your validator private key is encrypted and split between the nodes you want to run your validator. They use the online keyshares to recreate the full validator key for duties. This means that the original key can be stored offline. Perhaps you want to change the cluster participants sometime? then you'll need to split the key gain and assign it to nodes. 

This also means that as a staker, you just need to monitor the cluster, but you don't need physical hardware to run the validator.

Reviewer: does this work as a simplified version?
```suggestion
DVT also enables non-custodial staking by allowing you to distribute your validator key across remote nodes while keeping the full key completely offline. This means home stakers do not necessarily need to outlay for hardware or add to their home electricity bills, while distributing the key shares can help strengthen them against potential hacks.
```

### Staking as a Service (SaaS) {#saas}

> Staking providers and institutions managing many validators can leverage DVT to mitigate the risks associated with large-scale single validator instance setups. By distributing their infrastructure, they can introduce redundancy to their operations and diversify their infrastructure components to achieve greater performance and eliminate single points of failure in any single location or client type. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operators (such as staking pools and institutional stakers) managing many validators can use DVT to reduce their risk. By distributing their infrastructure, they can add redundancy to their operations and diversify their infrastructure. 
```

> Staking providers invest heavily to work around operational costs in development, DevOps, and comprehensive insurance policies. With DVT, responsibility is distributed between nodes, resulting in much lower operational risk and expense.

Reviewer: i don't totally understand how DVT eliminates the devops and insurance costs for SaaS providers? It just distributes allows a validator to be run by a collective rather than an individual operator. Can you clarify?

Reviewer 3: I think the wording just needs to be adjusted, since I don't think the intent here is that devops and insurance are no longer necessary at all, but having a distibuted trust model helps reduce the costs that may be associated with these things. Am I correct with this statement?

Reviewer 2: Yes, @wackerow is correct. We can adjust the wording.

Reviewer: How about this?

```suggestion
DVT shares responsibility for key management across multiple nodes, meaning some operational costs can also be shared. DVT can also reduce operational risk and insurance costs for staking providers.
```

> DVT can bridge the way for institutions that want to join ETH staking by reducing their risk as well as providing the much-needed transparency and trust required. By having permissioned sets of nodes that comply with KYC/AML regulations, institutions can know precisely the operators they are staking with, including slashing protection and redundancy benefits of the technology. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I don't think this is DVT-specific. The benefit DVT brings is lower slashing risk by reducing the correlation penalty potential by raising the amount of collusion required to corrupt a validator and adding resilience to hardware/software failure through diversity and redundancy (m of n validators required rather than 1 of 1). The other benefits mentioned here are not specific to DVT, afaict.

> ### Staking Pools {#staking-pools}

Reviewer: I don't really see how this is a different set of benefits compared to SaaS. For both personas, it comes down to reducing slashing/correlation penalty risks.

Think most of this section could actually be removed or cut down substantially, as the main points have been made earlier on.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Staking pools {#staking-pools}
```

I can potentially see value in having a section for staking pools to just highlight a few things for how this could impact these users. I do think part of this is redundant from above though, and if we do want to try and keep it I would suggest trying to bring it down to the same size as the SaaS section above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Staking Pools {#staking-pools} 
Due to standard validator setups, staking pools and LSP (Liquid Staking Providers) are compelled to have varying levels of single-operator trust. Relying on a single operator poses risks if they underperform, encounter downtime, get compromised, or act maliciously.

By leveraging DVT, the trust required from operators is significantly reduced. Pools can enable operators to hold stakes without needing custody of validator keys (as only key shares are utilized). It also allows managed stakes to be distributed between more operators (e.g., instead of having a single operator managing 1000 validators, DVT enables those validators to be collectively run by multiple operators). Diverse operator configurations will ensure that if one operator should go down, the others will still be able to attest. Resulting in redundancy and diversification that leads to better performance (maximizing rewards) and resilience.

```

---
title: Distributed Validator Technology
description: Distributed Validator Technology enables the distributed operation of an Ethereum validator by multiple parties.
lang: en
---

# Distributed Validator Technology {#what-is-dvt}

> **Distributed Validator Technology (DVT)** splits the private key used to secure a validator across many computers organized into a "cluster". The benefit of this is that it makes it very difficult for attackers to gain access to the key, because it is not stored in full on any single machine. It also allows for some nodes to go offline, as the necessary signing can be done by a subset of the machines in each cluster. This reduces single points of failure from the network and makes the whole validator set more robust. 

Reviewer 2: I agree and think we should stick to the naming convention.

Distributing a new or existing validator is quite complex in practice, but using a DVT solution like ssv.network as a layer to split the validator private key into multiple key shares makes the technology more accessible. Regardless of the [DVT-implementation](<https://ssv.network/>) stakers can have multiple nodes each operating a key share in a cluster, allowing them to ensure the uptime of their validators.

## How does DVT work? {#how-does-dvt-work}

A DVT solution contains the following components :

> ![A Diagram showing how a single validator key is split into key shares and distributed to multiple nodes with varying components.](./dvt-cluster.png)

Reviewer: yea this is a bit awkward - we might be able to get some designers involved to help. Basically we would want to either recreate the entire image as a react component that can conditionally render the labels depending on the site language, or replace the text in the image with symbols that can be explained in text (so that the entire page text can be translated into many languages without leaving language-specific labels in the image. 

As there are only two relevant labels (key share and validator key) the latter option seems fine - the other text elements are client names which don't need translation (@wackerow agree?)

I don't think this necessarily has to be a blocker, but it will need to be done asap after the page goes live.

> ![A Diagram showing how a single validator key is split into key shares and distributed to multiple nodes with varying components.](./dvt-cluster.png)

Author: we tried to find an original source for this but the current .png file  is the only we have unfortunately :)

If one of the components of a machine in a cluster goes down (For example, if there are four operators in a validator cluster and one uses a specific client that has a bug), the others ensure that the validator keeps running. 

### Centralization {#centralization}

Economies of scale in staking can lead to the centralization of stake, which is the idea that there is a single point of failure in the form of a single entity - a service provider or client - that has enough market share to potentially take down or censor the network (with malicious intent or through human error). 

Stake centralization can also lead to client centralization since it's easier for services to support only one or two client configurations. In case of a faulty node, or poor performance, this could have a massive impact on the entire network, which should be avoided.

Overall, DVT offers the following benefits to Ethereum:

> - Decentralization of Ethereum's PoS consensus

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Decentralization of Ethereum's proof-of-stake consensus
```

- Ensures the liveness of the network
- Creates validator fault tolerance
- Trust minimized validator operation
- Minimized slashing and downtime risks

> - Improves Diversity (client, data center, location, regulation, etc.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Improves diversity (client, data center, location, regulation, etc.)
```

- Enhanced security of validator key management

## DVT use cases {#dvt-use-cases}

DVT has significant implications for the broader staking industry:

### Solo stakers {#solo-stakers}

The main benefit DVT brings to solo stakers is that it removes the technical barrier for running a validator node. Stakers that want to run their own validators no longer have to supply the infrastructure to participate in staking. Running a single validator instance is susceptible to technical issues, hacking, and high maintenance costs. A solo staker can use DVT to run their validator in a decentralized manner, on par with the performance of large staking services, while still having complete control over their validator keys and custody of their funds.

> ### Staking as a Service (SaaS) {#saas}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Staking as a service (SaaS) {#saas}
```
